:github_url: https://git.door43.org/unfoldingWord/en_ugg/src/branch/master/content/adjective.rst

.. _adjective:

Adjective
=========

Glossary
--------

An is a part of speech which describes a noun or pronoun.

.. csv-table:: Example: TIT 1:13

  ἡ μαρτυρία αὕτη ἐστὶν ἀληθής
  hē martyria hautē estin alēthēs
  The testimony this one it is true
  This statement is true

Article
-------

An describes, or modifies, a noun or a pronoun. An adjective may give
more information about a noun, or it may define which noun the writer is
talking about.

Form
~~~~

Greek adjectives must match the noun they modify in **case**,
**number**, and **gender**. Because of this, they can take the form of
all three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter. (When listed in a
lexicon, the will be in its nominative, singular, masculine form.)
Adjectives will show these forms by using the same endings as nouns.
(The set of suffixes used by each adjective is determined by its stem,
just as is true with nouns. The paradigm below shows one of the most
common sets of adjective endings, but some adjectives will use other
suffixes.)

If an is functioning as a **substantive** (see below), its case will be
determined by its function within the sentence, and its number and
gender will be determined by the noun it represents.

Paradigm
^^^^^^^^

.. csv-table::

  Form,Greek,Transliteration,Translation
  Nominative Singular Masculine,καλός,kalos,beautiful
  Genitive Singular Masculine,καλοῦ,kalou,beautiful
  Dative Singular Masculine,καλῷ,kalō,beautiful
  Accusative Singular Masculine,καλόν,kalon,beautiful
  Vocative Singular Masculine,καλέ,kale,beautiful
  ,,,
  Nom./Voc. Plural Masculine,καλοί,kaloi,beautiful
  Genitive Plural Masculine,καλῶν,kalōn,beautiful
  Dative Plural Masculine,καλοῖς,kalois,beautiful
  Accusative Plural Masculine,καλούς,kalous,beautiful
  ,,,
  Nominative Singular Feminine,καλή,kalē,beautiful
  Genitive Singular Feminine,καλῆς,kalēs,beautiful
  Dative Singular Feminine,καλῇ,kalē,beautiful
  Accusative Singular Feminine,καλήν,kalēn,beautiful
  Vocative Singular Feminine,καλή,kalē,beautiful
  ,,,
  Nominative Plural Feminine,καλαί,kalai,beautiful
  Genitive Plural Feminine,καλῶν,kalōn,beautiful
  Dative Plural Feminine,καλαῖς,kalais,beautiful
  Accusative Plural Feminine,καλάς,kalas,beautiful
  ,,,
  Nominative Singular Neuter,καλόν,kalon,beautiful
  Genitive Singular Neuter,καλοῦ,kalou,beautiful
  Dative Singular Neuter,καλῷ,kalō,beautiful
  Accusative Singular Neuter,καλόν,kalon,beautiful
  Vocative Singular Neuter,καλόν,kalon,beautiful
  ,,,
  Nominative Plural Neuter,καλά,kala,beautiful
  Genitive Plural Neuter,καλῶν,kalōn,beautiful
  Dative Plural Neuter,καλοῖς,kalois,beautiful
  Accusative Plural Neuter,καλά,kala,beautiful

Note that the adjective's feminine form depends on its own stem, not on
the noun it is modifying. (For example, an that takes η (eta) feminine
endings will do so even when modifying a noun that has α (alpha)
endings, and vice versa.) As long as the adjective agrees with its noun
in case, number, and gender, the specific form of its endings makes no
difference to translation.

.. csv-table::

  τῆς δικαίας τῆς ἀναστροφῆς
  tēs dikaias tēs anastrophēs
  the righteous the conduct-of
  of the righteous conduct

If a noun declines using suffixes that do not match its true gender, the
adjective, like the article, will take the form that represents the true
gender of the noun.

.. csv-table::

  τούς ἀγαθούς τούς προφήτας
  tous agathous tous prophētas
  the good the prophet
  the good prophet

In this example, the word προφήτας appears feminine, but is actually
masculine. The takes a masculine form to match the true gender of the
noun.

Function
~~~~~~~~

Attributive and Restrictive
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the is giving more information about its noun, it is functioning as
an **attributive** adjective. If it is identifying which noun the writer
is speaking about, it is functioning as a **restrictive** adjective. An
adjective functioning as attributive or restrictive may come before or
after the noun it modifies. It will usually have an article.

.. csv-table::

  ὁ πιστός ὁ οἰκονόμος
  ho **pistos** ho oikonomos
  the faithful the steward
  the faithful steward

.. csv-table::

  ὁ οἰκονόμος ὁ πιστός
  ho oikonomos ho pistos
  the steward the faithful
  the faithful steward

Predicative
^^^^^^^^^^^

If an does not have an article, but the modified noun does have an
article, the adjective is probably functioning as a **predicate**, which
completes a statement about the noun by following a being or sensing
verb, or a verb that explains the noun's appearance. In this type of
construct, the Greek sometimes leaves out the verb. The verb is
understood, but not stated. Some languages need a verb in every
sentence, so the understood verb may be added to the translation in
order to make the sentence grammatically correct in the new language.

.. csv-table::

  πιστός ὁ οἰκονόμος
  pistos ho oikonomos
  faithful the steward
  The steward is faithful.

Substantive
^^^^^^^^^^^

Sometimes, an is used without any noun that it could be modifying, so
the adjective functions as a noun by itself. In this case, the reader
understands that the writer is referring to some unnamed person or
object, but the adjective is the only identifying term given to the
person or object. An adjective functioning in this way is called a
**substantive** (because the substance of a noun is implied by the
adjective). A substantive adjective will usually have an article.

.. csv-table::

  ὁ πιστός
  ho pistos
  the faithful
  the faithful man/person

.. csv-table::

  ἡ πιστή
  hē pistē
  the faithful
  the faithful woman/person

.. csv-table::

  οἱ πιστοι
  hoi pistoi
  the faithful
  the faithful people/ones

Comparative
^^^^^^^^^^^

When an is used to compare its noun to another noun, it is functioning
as a **comparative** adjective. Comparatives are formed by adding -τερος
(masc.), -τερα (fem.), or -τερον (neut.) to the end of the adjective.
(Some irregular adjectives take the suffixes -(ι)ων or -ον instead.)

.. csv-table::

  τό ἐλαχιστότερον τό θηρίον
  to elachistoteron to thērion
  the smaller the animal
  the smaller animal

Superlative and Elative
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An that compares a noun to two or more other nouns is a **superlative**
adjective. The suffixes that show the superlative form are -τατος (m.),
-τατη (f.), and -τατον (n.) or -ιστος (m.), -ιστη (f.), and -ιστον (n.).
(In some instances, ancient Greeks would use the superlative form of an
adjective to compare two things, rather than to express a true
superlative quality. Adjectives used in this way are called **elative**,
and function as comparative adjectives.)

.. csv-table::

  τό ἐλάχιστον τό τέκνον
  to elachiston to teknon
  the smallest the child
  the smallest child
