# adjective Article

An adjective describes, or modifies, a noun or a pronoun.  An adjective may give more information about a noun, or it may define which noun the writer is talking about.  

## Form

Greek adjectives must match the noun they modify in **case**, **number**, and **gender**.  Because of this, they can take the form of all three genders: masculine, feminine, and neuter.  (When listed in a lexicon, the adjective will be in its nominative, singular, masculine form.)   Adjectives will show these forms by using the same endings as nouns.  (The set of suffixes used by each adjective is determined by its stem, just as is true with nouns.  The paradigm below shows one of the most common sets of adjective endings, but some adjectives will use other suffixes.)

If an adjective is functioning as a **substantive** (see below), its case will be determined by its function within the sentence, and its number and gender will be determined by the noun it represents.  

### Paradigm

<table>
  <tr>
    <th>Form</th>
    <th>Greek</th>
    <th>Transliteration</th>
    <th>Translation</th>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nominative Singular Masculine</td>
    <td>καλός</td>
    <td>kalos</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Singular Masculine</td>
    <td>καλοῦ</td>
    <td>kalou</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Singular Masculine</td>
    <td>καλῷ</td>
    <td>kalō</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Singular Masculine</td>
    <td>καλόν</td>
    <td>kalon</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Vocative Singular Masculine</td>
    <td>καλέ</td>
    <td>kale</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nom./Voc. Plural Masculine</td>
    <td>καλοί</td>
    <td>kaloi</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Plural Masculine</td>
    <td>καλῶν</td>
    <td>kalōn</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Plural Masculine</td>
    <td>καλοῖς</td>
    <td>kalois</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Plural Masculine</td>
    <td>καλούς</td>
    <td>kalous</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nominative Singular Feminine</td>
    <td>καλή</td>
    <td>kalē</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Singular Feminine</td>
    <td>καλῆς</td>
    <td>kalēs</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Singular Feminine</td>
    <td>καλῇ</td>
    <td>kalē</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Singular Feminine</td>
    <td>καλήν</td>
    <td>kalēn</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Vocative Singular Feminine</td>
    <td>καλή</td>
    <td>kalē</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nominative Plural Feminine</td>
    <td>καλαί</td>
    <td>kalai</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Plural Feminine</td>
    <td>καλῶν</td>
    <td>kalōn</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Plural Feminine</td>
    <td>καλαῖς</td>
    <td>kalais</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Plural Feminine</td>
    <td>καλάς</td>
    <td>kalas</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nominative Singular Neuter</td>
    <td>καλόν</td>
    <td>kalon</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Singular Neuter</td>
    <td>καλοῦ</td>
    <td>kalou</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Singular Neuter</td>
    <td>καλῷ</td>
    <td>kalō</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Singular Neuter</td>
    <td>καλόν</td>
    <td>kalon</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Vocative Singular Neuter</td>
    <td>καλόν</td>
    <td>kalon</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
    <td></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Nominative Plural Neuter</td>
    <td>καλά </td>
    <td>kala </td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Genitive Plural Neuter</td>
    <td>καλῶν</td>
    <td>kalōn</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Dative Plural Neuter</td>
    <td>καλοῖς</td>
    <td>kalois</td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>Accusative Plural Neuter</td>
    <td>καλά </td>
    <td>kala </td>
    <td>beautiful</td>
  </tr>
</table>

Note that the adjective's feminine form depends on its own stem, not on the noun it is modifying.  (For example, an adjective that takes η (eta) feminine endings will do so even when modifying a noun that has α (alpha) endings, and vice versa.)  As long as the adjective agrees with its noun in case, number, and gender, the specific form of its endings makes no difference to translation. 

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>τῆς <b>δικαίας</b> τῆς ἀναστροφῆς</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>tēs <b>dikaias</b> tēs anastrophēs</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>righteous</b> the conduct-of</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>of the <b>righteous</b> conduct</td>
  </tr>
</table>

If a noun declines using suffixes that do not match its true gender, the adjective, like the article, will take the form that represents the true gender of the noun.  

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>τούς <b>ἀγαθούς</b> τούς προφήτας</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>tous <b>agathous</b> tous prophētas</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>good</b> the prophet</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>good</b> prophet</td>
  </tr>
</table>

In this example, the word προφήτας appears feminine, but is actually masculine.  The adjective takes a masculine form to match the true gender of the noun.  

## Function

### Attributive and Restrictive

If the adjective is giving more information about its noun, it is functioning as an **attributive** adjective.  If it is identifying which noun the writer is speaking about, it is functioning as a **restrictive** adjective.   An adjective functioning as attributive or restrictive may come before or after the noun it modifies.  It will usually have an article.

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>ὁ <b>πιστός</b> ὁ οἰκονόμος</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
    <td>ho <b>pistos</b> ho oikonomos</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> the steward</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> steward</td>
  </tr>
</table>

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>ὁ οἰκονόμος ὁ <b>πιστός</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>ho oikonomos ho <b>pistos</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the steward the <b>faithful</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> steward</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Predicative

If an adjective does not have an article, but the modified noun does have an article, the adjective is probably functioning as a **predicate**, which completes a statement about the noun by following a being or sensing verb, or a verb that explains the noun's appearance.  In this type of construct, the Greek sometimes leaves out the verb.  The verb is understood, but not stated.  Some languages need a verb in every sentence, so the understood verb may be added to the translation in order to make the sentence grammatically correct in the new language.   

<table>
  <tr>
  <td><b>πιστός</b> ὁ οἰκονόμος</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td><b>pistos</b> ho oikonomos</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td><b>faithful</b> the steward </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>The steward <b>is faithful</b>.</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Substantive

Sometimes, an adjective is used without any noun that it could be modifying, so the adjective functions as a noun by itself.   In this case, the reader understands that the writer is referring to some unnamed person or object, but the adjective is the only identifying term given to the person or object.  An adjective functioning in this way is called a **substantive** (because the substance of a noun is implied by the adjective).  A substantive adjective will usually have an article.  

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>ὁ <b>πιστός</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>ho <b>pistos</b>  </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful man/person</b></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>ἡ <b>πιστή</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>hē <b>pistē</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful woman/person</b></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>οἱ <b>πιστοι</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>hoi <b>pistoi</b></td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful</b> </td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>faithful people/ones</b></td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Comparative 

When an adjective is used to compare its noun to another noun, it is functioning as a **comparative** adjective.  Comparatives are formed by adding -τερος (masc.), -τερα (fem.), or -τερον (neut.) to the end of the adjective.  (Some irregular adjectives take the suffixes -(ι)ων or -ον instead.)

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>τό <b>ἐλαχιστότερον</b> τό θηρίον</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>to <b>elachistoteron</b> to thērion</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>smaller</b> the animal</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>smaller</b> animal</td>
  </tr>
</table>

### Superlative and Elative

An adjective that compares a noun to two or more other nouns is a **superlative** adjective.  The suffixes that show the superlative form are -τατος (m.), -τατη (f.), and -τατον (n.) or -ιστος (m.), -ιστη (f.), and -ιστον (n.).  (In some instances, ancient Greeks would use the superlative form of an adjective to compare two things, rather than to express a true superlative quality.  Adjectives used in this way are called **elative**, and function as comparative adjectives.)  

<table>
  <tr>
  <td>τό <b>ἐλάχιστον</b> τό τέκνον</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>to <b>elachiston</b> to teknon</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>smallest</b> the child</td>
  </tr>
  <tr>
  <td>the <b>smallest</b> child</td>
  </tr>
</table>